[Applause]
thank you and good afternoon so we're
going to today at talk this afternoon a
little bit on building computational
clusters with mac OS x server and with
ex serve and i think it's really
important before we get too far into the
presentation to make sure we're all here
understanding the right thing clustering
is one of those really powerful
overloaded words that means a lot of
things to a lot of people and I get
asked all the time ooh you know I want
to X Custer my exurbs well what does
that mean and I so I think it's
important to recognize that clusters are
use the term clusterings actually used
in two very distinct areas the first is
clustering for high availability I want
to take a server service and cluster two
or more servers together for high
availability such that if one would go
down the other one takes over its place
with ideally no network interruption
that's something very different than
what we're here to talk about today
which is clustering for computational
ability aggregating the computational
performance of several servers together
to generate a larger compute farm per se
so just to be clear that's what we're
going to be talking about this afternoon
anyone interested in learning a little
bit more about applications for high
availability with xserve invite you to
my session tomorrow afternoon on
deploying xserve will touch on some
approaches to the other kind of
clustering so let's talk a little bit
about we want to cover in this session
and dive right into it so obviously the
first thing might be why would might
want to build a cluster what goals would
it deliver for me how can we use xserve
and mac OS x server in a cluster what
are the benefits and advantages typical
cluster architecture what does it mean
to build a cluster what is the topology
the network the basic system
requirements and physical requirements
needed to do that talk a little bit
about deploying applications on a
cluster what kind of things can be
distributed and some approaches to that
physical Network concerns when you bring
a large number of CPUs into a certain
area they're obviously
requirements that go above and beyond
the number of machines it requires
planning on you know power cooling and
network requirements we'll touch on the
requirements in those areas as well
tools and techniques for deploying of
cluster what resources are available and
what tools are available and highlight
some of those capabilities so of course
the first big question would be you know
why clusters and you know clustering is
a something we've seen really take over
or really become predominant in the
industry of the last year or two matter
of fact we've seen a lot of success with
early adopters of xserve deploying
exurbs into large cluster deployments
for aggregating computational power and
it's really quite simple the fact is
that the kind of problems that
researchers in many different domains
are trying to solve our significantly
greater computational challenges than a
single CPU can provide so you could you
know have even the fastest cpu sit
insuran on a very challenging problem
but it's going to take in an incredible
amount of time you know what better way
than to aggregate many machines to
tackle that problem the other challenges
computational capability is not growing
nearly as fast as the need to process
data and you can look at any number and
we'll give some specific examples any
number of fields where we the sheer fact
that the only way to solve these
problems that are being a challenged
today is by throwing more CPU horsepower
at it the chips are just not getting
fast enough compared to the the
challenging problems that we're trying
to solve the other reality is that you
know the typical work horses in the
compute space previously which were very
large you know 16 32 64 way SMP boxes
are incredibly expensive and complex you
know it's not always easy to throw very
large you know quote-unquote
supercomputer type hardware at these
kind of problems and it's not very
inexpensive either
fact is that you know small you know
quote-unquote commodity hardware
clusters are beginning to take
significant ranks in the top
supercomputing ranks and this is just a
trend that's going to continue the other
advantage of clusters is that and we'll
talk more about this is that it's very
easy to scale a cluster to both budget
and problem so you know based on a given
budget you can you know very granular
lee add more computing power by adding
more compute elements to a problem and
of course it's also easy to scale out
that cluster based on the size of your
problem and so if you need more
computational power add some more
modular servers to your cluster
deployment so it makes it very flexible
in these areas some example applications
so take some of the more obvious ones
first you know image manipulations
rendering compositing the only way these
digital effects that are being done in
theaters today are being generated is by
massive computation behind the scenes
and again clustering is a way to achieve
some of these goals simulation you know
biology simulating car crashes airplanes
in financial models of the markets is
something very well mapping out to
compute cluster environments and of
course one of the mainstays in the
cluster market some of the areas where
we're seeing some of the biggest
strongest earliest successes of
ex-service is in the life sciences with
genomics and other kind of life science
analysis let me give you some more
dramatic examples so so Pixar's Toy
Story they have an amazing little
website up on their pics are calm
website and there's a whole category
called how we do it you know behind the
scenes and on that site they talk about
what it took to build Toy Story 2 and
the example they give is the average
frame in toy story 2 took six hours to
render and I'll stress average because
they also highlight some of the more
complex work took closer to 80 hours of
frame but just as an example six hours
of frame if you do a little bit of quick
math
you multiply that by 24 frames a second
time 60 seconds in a minute x 92 minutes
in the feature film that turns out to be
around you know shy of eight hundred
thousand hours or you know roughly 92
years of computation behind that and
that's you know just for the rendering
piece of the film so you can imagine
that the only way to deliver this kind
of result is with massive computational
clustering power behind the scenes and
you know it's also interesting that this
is toy story 2 which is a number of
years ago I can only imagine what
Finding Nemo took to render look at
another example is in the genomic front
life sciences environment the fact is
that the data that needs to be analyzed
is growing significantly faster than
Moore's Law so you know processors
aren't getting as fast as the data is
growing so again Moore's Law you know
processor speed doubles every 18 months
based on this is data from genbank NCBI
roughly in the same time frame that
member Lee the amount of data is growing
by the order of 8x so again the only way
to do this is aggregating computing
power so let's talk a little bit about X
serve so why do I do we think xserve has
a story in the computational space well
a couple different reasons the first and
foremost is you know in the one you for
fact we're able to deliver quite a bit
of processing power in a small form
factor when we couple that with velocity
engine in the g4 exer becomes a very
potent machine for computational
analysis now I'll save the question now
which is you know the g5 question with
the xserve a lot of people ask me that
I'm sure that will come up in Q&A so
i'll mention it now that not able to
comment and answer that question for you
today but anyone who's seen the g5
machines when they were here earlier in
the week the heat sink is rather
significant and so have a little bit of
a challenge to get this in an xserve but
it will be an interesting challenge
regarding mac OS 10 at michael's 10 is a
tremendous advantage for x
in the cluster space in that we have a
very powerful open source BST core UNIX
operating system that can leverage the
major open source projects and compile
major applications it out in industry
and yet take advantage of an operating
system that's very easy to deploy and
easy to maintain this is a real
highlight of X server Mac os10 server
and we'll talk actually some of the the
ways you can very easily and rapidly
deploy Mac OS 10 servers and xserve in
this space and finally remote management
you know rack mounted servers are meant
to live in Iraq and not necessarily with
the system administrator in front of the
rack at all the times and clusters are
even more so in that environment and so
having powerful remote management tools
is essential to be able to maintain and
monitor the status of a cluster finally
when we introduced the xserve there's a
big request for from customers on an
xserve that was really streamlined for
compute needs and based on that customer
request we designed a special
configuration of the xserve especially
optimized for this so this is our
compute cluster node and actually you
can see several units in the rack up
here on stage this machine is against
streamlined optimized just for compute
tasks and just to highlight the two
configurations in the differences you
know again the the current what we call
affectionately the slot load xserve
which was the the speed bump to exer we
introduced in the February time frame we
offering two standard configurations
single a dual processor 12 for hard
drive bays up to 7 20 gigabytes of
storage dual Gigabit Ethernet cd-rom or
combo Drive VGA standard and of course
mac OS x server software preloaded ready
to go with unlimited client license the
compute node on comparison is again the
streamlined version with always two
processors again optimized for compute a
single drive bay so there aren't even
you know blanks actually a different
facial on the machine on board Gigabit
Ethernet no optical drive no
really obviously you don't want optical
and video and every single unit in your
cluster and mac OS x server unlimited
i'm sorry 10 user license with that
machine since obviously it's not being
driven as a file server 10 users
provides all the remote management tools
that are needed for that down machine
let's talk a little bit about a typical
cluster deployment what is it you know
typically look like when we deploy
xserve in a cluster environment and so
there are three main pieces in exergue
cluster deployments start with the will
call the top which is the head node the
head node and actually in the cluster we
have here is built upon this model is
the top machine typically this is a full
xserve with multiple drive bays this is
really the machine responsible for
managing the cluster obviously it
typically runs the software to
distribute the load manage user access
provides storage to the compute elements
in the cluster that could be through
internal storage or through external
storage and again in this example here
we have onstage and extra raid providing
the storage for that head node one of
the most important pieces in a clusters
of course the interconnect network so
typically the head node is the only
machine that you have connected to your
put you know campus or corporate network
production network per se it's typically
the only thing that's directly
accessible to end users on the network
the interconnect network actually
connects the head node to the compute
elements this can be done in a number of
ways in most traditional fashion is
using ethernet networking technologies
of 100 megabit networks or gigabit
networks for added performance we have
mirror net capabilities on Mac OS 10 and
mac OS x server so marinette is a
high-performance pci interconnect card
with extremely low latency between nodes
and for certain kinds of applications
this is very very important and so Mira
net is an option available and so
there's also an accompanying mirror net
switch that allows that interconnect
and actually firewire becomes very
interesting for smaller clusters as an
interconnect since for the couple cost
of a cable you can change several Xers
together especially with firewire 800
built-in on xserve an extra xgy on the
back of the xserve that when we
introduced firewire 800 we made sure
that there were two ports of firewire
800 on the back so that we could chain
down the back of a small cluster and
have firewire connectivity now firewire
has a lot of interesting properties as
an interconnect network it has extremely
low latency it has DMA capability
between nodes which means one one node
can DM a memory out of another node
without any processor intervention by
the secondary hosts we also have in the
latest revisions of mac OS x server have
added IP over firewire so we have the
ability to run standard IP networking in
any application that takes advantage of
standard IP stacks can take advantage of
the firewire network built right into
into mac OS x server so this becomes
very interesting again for the cost of a
firewire 9 pin 2 9 pin cable chain down
a small cluster you know somewhere
between four and eight machines this is
really ideal no additional switching
costs and of course you know the
workhorse of the of the clusters of
course the compute elements so you know
any number of compute elements can be
added to the environment and scale that
out to your specific tasks and problems
so the way we see this deployed with
extra hardware is of course an xserve
standard server configuration as the
head node providing storage and network
access optionally an xserve raid for up
to two and a half terabytes of raid
protected storage again through fibre
channel which are represented by the
heavy white line an extra of compute
node compute node configurations and of
course in this particular example a
10100 ethernet switch so if we look
beyond the hardware now let's talk about
some of the other issues that we have to
deal with when we look at deploying
clusters
which are some of the most interesting
things from a excerpt perspective which
is deployment and management so
obviously the first things we have to
look at our physical concerns you know
where is this equipment going to live
what are the power environmental
networking requirements and also logical
concerns you know software installation
configuration management so it's take
each of these individually so let's
first talk about power environmental so
xserve actually has quite an interesting
advantage in that with the g4 processor
it has quite a low power consumption and
heat output compared to other competing
processors in its class so when we look
at the exurbs off the back of the data
sheet we rated at 3.6 amps at 3 45 watts
now this i should add is a for fully
fully loaded system if you stuff every
possible thing you could in the box and
thats actually has margin on top of that
what we've actually found is that when
you actually measure real-world usage
when you match the processor at one
hundred percent running velocity engine
optimized code really leveraging the
processing power out of the xserve
you're going to really have to work hard
to draw around two amps at 134 watts so
the actual real-world power consumption
is actually much lower than the actual
system rating and we actually publish
these numbers in our knowledge base k
base info apple com and we also propose
bt's per hour which is just shy of 460
BTUs an hour for a dual processor system
so for one system that's that's not too
much of a challenge you can pretty much
plug an xserve in just about anywhere
and not have a problem but what happens
is when you rack a whole bunch of these
in a space and multiplying these out
you've got to really take into account
both power and heat requirements so you
know if you multiply those by 16 you
start getting nearly 60 amps and about
50 500 watts of power obviously much
lower than that in real world
sumption but you do have to plan up for
start-up currents which are actually
close to rated consumption and one of
the one of the things that you can do is
actually stagger the startup in the
cluster to prevent maximum current load
at the power up time and of course you
know you know over 7,000 BTU an hour so
from a environmental space making sure
you have adequate cooling for a room
that's going to host a clusters of
course critical so you know the big
things here is of course that obviously
you need to plan for these requirements
you know if you're you know ups becomes
critical and being able to plan
appropriately for that one of the
strategies that we're starting to see is
typically the most important element in
a compute cluster is providing power and
backup power for the head node in the
storage so very rarely do you actually
put all the elements on protective
backup power since if you have resource
management software any terminated
computation will be restarted
automatically when an element's
available so the head node is really the
critical piece in this whole puzzle so
the next thing becomes an issue of the
networking you know what what kind of
problems do you have and what kind of
interconnects are required to be able to
manage this cluster and so one of the
big factors becomes whether how much I
owe it does the particular compute task
do and whether you get the bang for the
buck deploying Gigabit Ethernet as a as
an example across a series of compute
elements if there's heavy I oh there
might be dramatic advantages to adding
that kind of network behind the scenes
other types of compute jobs don't
require that it's very compute focused
and sits and processes on a small amount
of data and a great example that kind of
a more dramatic example that is for
example study at home right if you've
ever run the study at home client even
over a very low speed modem connection
it will download you know a block of
data and it will sit in schwerin on it
for hours so the having a
high-performance network back to the
machine doling out to work
is not real critical however other
problems that's not the case the other
question becomes that of latency a lot
of computational problems are what you
might call them Barisan a parallel in
that you know a job can be sent out
across a whole bunch of nodes and with
no dependencies on it will just sit and
churn and then return the results other
problems have very tight dependencies
that the results of one computation will
get fed into the results of another
computation and they'll be tightly
coupled and so having a low low latency
not necessarily bandwidth but low
latency between the machines becomes
very very critical and this is where
solutions like Marinette become
important because of that low latency
interconnect and of course the other
thing that you'll you'll always want to
manage is just you know who can connect
to this cluster and typically access is
provided through the head node and
secured through the head node so you
authenticating to the head node submit
your job to the head node and the work
becomes to be managed from there let's
talk a look at some of the logical
concerns the management and this is an
area where we actually have a lot of
advantages with the tools that are
provided in mac OS x server what's
interesting is a lot of the tools that
we provide a mac OS 10 server for
desktop management become very
applicable for cluster management and so
tools like cloning tools net food and
network install becomes very very
valuable in in cluster management the
reality is is that for a cluster you
know more often than not every every
compute element needs to have the exact
same system image exact same access to
tools and so net food becomes a very
very viable way to manage and have
basically a single system image across
your entire cluster and actually when we
add some of the headless tools that we
provide out of the box with mac OS 10
server and with xserve literally you can
take a brand-new xserve out of the box
hold down a button on the front panel
and have it net boot off your head node
it really provides quick out of the box
deployment for xserve of course remote
management tools are essential again
clusters are meant to live in iraq
somewhere
should be able to access them from
anywhere you may choose to provide
command line access with things like SSH
or provide web tools so provide web
interfaces and you'll see some examples
of that in this session and finally user
accessibility actually just touched on
that you know web interface and terminal
access and finally back up being able to
have a backup strategy for the head node
being but back up that critical data
again typically in these deployments the
compute elements themselves are thought
of as disposable they're quick quick too
easy quick to replace a reimage enjoy
the head node that becomes critical on
the storage that's provided there
particularly the computation programs
and the results so before I introduce my
next speaker wanted to highlight and
will kind of bring up some of the things
that we typically say for the end of
these presentations up to the front
wanted to really highlight some of the
key cluster resources that are available
for Mac os10 emeka stem server you know
in one of the inside check lunch
yesterday someone asked about you know
Apple providing an MPI stack and whether
they thought that was important I think
one of the interesting things I think
you'll see here is that this is an area
where we have actually a wealth of
solutions to choose from and we actually
prefer having a large number of
excellent open source and third-party
solutions available so if we look at
some of the examples you know one of the
keys of any cluster deployment is drm
software digital distributed resource
management and we have a number of
solutions to choose from in a platform
lsf some grid engine open PDF PBS pro as
some of the top examples
high-performance computing tools so
again in the MPI stack area n pitch NP
ID pro lamb MPI Linden paradise and
pooch from dogger research are all great
examples of solutions in this space I'll
available for Mac OS 10 grid computing
tools gridiron software a really
excellent piece of distributed
application resource Globus toolkit was
actually ported to Mac OS 10 from the
bio team and as a port of
available from them science and research
applications you'll see a demo of grid
mathematical a little later in this
session excellent tool for a number of
kinds of computation life science
applications turbo blast turbo hub turbo
bench from turbo works bioinformatics
toolkit which is a set of life sciences
applications that have been ported to
Mac os10 kind of a single click double
double clickable installer for Mac OS 10
and inquiry bioinformatics that the same
solutions wrapped up into a really easy
deployment solution you'll hear more
about that in a minute so with that said
I'd like to introduce our next speaker
Michael famous from the bio team michael
is a principal investigator and a
founding partner and is going to talk to
a little bit more about accessible
clustering thanks doc thanks just work
again my name is Michael a penis and I'm
a scientist and co-founder of a
bioinformatic consulting group called
the bio team one of the interesting
things I learned from one of my host
here at the conference is that one out
of nine attendees is a scientist that
true scientist here I'm actually quite
impressed that the way this platform is
it seems to resonate with the scientific
community it's it's very well matched
anyway so what motivates me as a bio
informatics consultant in the morning is
how to take advantage of boundless
computing in this presentation I'm going
to briefly talk about some of the
pressures in life science computing just
expand a little bit beyond what Doug
talked about briefly talk about
computing solutions with emphasis on
clustering and then talk about instant
clustering and I'll explain that as we
go along
quickly the bio team is a group of
scientist focused upon delivering life
science solutions the group but what
makes us somewhat unique is that we're
somewhat vendor agnostic we work with
all sorts of platforms including Apple
platforms as well the principles of bio
team have been working together on
several projects over the past few years
and most recently a great deal of
projects with Apple this list here shows
some of the clients that we've worked
with and actually I bumped into
representatives of some of these
organizations at this conference as well
so again what motivates me as a bio
informatics consultant is to get my
clients to think about what you could do
with boundless computing that is what if
cpu was not a limitation in modeling and
simulation what if you had very fast
access to terabytes of information and
how what's the most appropriate way to
visualize the the knowledge that is
derived from these data and analyses in
doing so the computing has to be
accessible and in order to do that some
level abstraction has to be defined
Apple seems to be great at this in terms
of for example the finder the emphasis
is on the user experience as opposed to
the nuts and bolts of the computing
behind the scenes it's true for to
enable scientific computing as well it's
not about the computers it's about the
applications and pipelines involved in
the scientific scientific computation so
what is important from a scientific
perspective is quick data access
reliable fast execution and application
interoperability
what is not so important in order to
carry out science is the nuts and both
of the computing you know the details of
the storage how the storage is laid out
or even what type of processor is used
it really doesn't matter them and it
shouldn't matter from a scientific
perspective so there are there are many
approaches to solving vast computing
problems and clustering it can be
inappropriate solution there are
benefits to clustering as Doug pointed
out and perhaps some arguments against
clustering and I'm going to augment what
Doug was talking about in terms of why
clustering well I think one of the most
compelling reasons to go for clustering
is scalability because in terms of
scientific research it's very difficult
to forecast what you're going to be
doing tomorrow so clustering inherently
is a blueprint for growth you can't if
you architect the system properly you
can increase your computing power in
step with your your computational need
another compelling reason is price
performance of commodity hardware we've
seen that you know with the announcement
of the g5 dual processor box for only
three thousand dollars that that's same
computing power if I wanted to buy a
four or five years ago would probably be
tens if not hundreds thousands of
dollars for the same thing computing is
getting ridiculously cheap if you look
at the curve they're going to be giving
it away pretty soon so the trick is how
do we take advantage of it another
important aspect about cluster computing
in terms of architecting clusters is
flexibility you can construct your
architecture based upon the scientific
demands of the
patient in your infrastructure there are
many parameters that you can tweak from
a hardware perspective for example as
that was pointing out there are network
alternatives and that decision is based
upon the applications that are within
your workflow also there are storage
options as well do you take advantage of
local caching on the individual nodes or
do you some kind of network or sand
available storage and even the
processors that are some applications
may take advantage of different
processors or accelerators better than
others and I think one of the an
interesting flexibility compelling
reason is clusters kind of transcends of
a single vendor solution you're allowed
to build a cluster of components that
are optimal to your app to your workflow
as opposed to a single vendor providing
everything which some of the components
made the ideal some may not reliability
is another reason for clustering and
this may not be so obvious it does
pointed this out a little bit but with
careful architecture of a cluster
careful identification of single points
of failure your cluster can have
extremely high availability high uptime
the architecture can be such that if a
compute element dies you just pop it out
like you would replace a light bulb in
your home you wouldn't have to shut down
the grid of your home and unsolder the
light bulb inside or a new one in you
just unscrew it and plug it in but
clustering is not appropriate for all
applications or all workflows or or
types of scientific research not all
applications math too loosely coupled
architectures an example of this could
be relational database engine
another reason why clustering may not
work out very well is management
complexity is if you don't take careful
attention to the initial architecture
the the effort required to maintain your
system may scale with the number of
elements within your cluster that's a
sign of failure I think one of the more
compelling reasons like clustering it
can be difficult is user application
complexity you may have a really good
application that one's great on a single
processor but you need a thousand times
that how do you break that up and run it
in parallel really depends upon the
application the tools that we can use to
construct that there isn't a silver
bullet that you can use to automatically
paralyzed an application it still takes
special skill to do that reliability is
also on this list because of that the
architecture is not correct you can have
and you don't pay attention to single
points of failure it may be very
difficult to maintain also achieving
high utilization seems to be important
consideration people it comes back to
the user application if you don't get
the degree of parallelization necessary
to utilize the clusters engine you're
kind of wasting all your computer
elements
this is a different topological view of
what Doug showed earlier in terms of the
we call it the portal architecture and
again this is a great way of abstracting
the computing resources from both from
an administrative perspective as well as
a user perspective neither administrator
or users are allowed to access the
individual nodes within the private
subnet in which the cluster elements
reside on and because you do this then
the notes become anonymous that allows
you to replace them if if something goes
wrong so I mentioned scalability again I
think scalability is a crucial issue in
that clustering can address but there
are many characteristics of what
scalability is scalability in terms of
quantity of data that you're
distributing on the cluster scalability
in terms of number of users that are
hitting the system all those have to be
addressed in terms of architecture I
think one of the more significant
components of achieving scalability is
fault tolerance how is your cisco
systems going to be aware of some kind
of adverse event within your cluster the
flipside of fault tolerance is
automation how we going to respond to
that adverse condition so that you can
continue to process so you don't need
extensive management or monitoring
capability to ensure completion of your
workflow
okay so i wanted to contrast that two
different approaches for computing the
mainframe SMP monolithic approach
compared to the clustering approach so
again one thing that's going against the
clustering approach is application
complexity it's definitely more
difficult to make full usage of a
cluster than if you had a SP type
machine over what's going against the
mainframe smt approach the computing is
the upfront cost a mainframe type system
with comparable compute power of a
cluster can be about 4 to 20 times more
expensive as I mentioned a cluster
architecture can give you better
scalability but countering the up up for
cost of the mainframe system is the
total cost of ownership of maintaining
that system if you don't architect your
cluster correctly then it can be
extremely expensive communicating so if
you can address the application
complexity and the management complexity
then the clustering solution can be very
compelling ok I'm going to switch gears
a little bit and talk about the bio team
inquiry the inquiry was 10 an award last
night an apple designer award in the
category of server solutions so what is
inquiry the concept behind inquiry is
instant scalable informatics just add
hardware so the concept is to provide a
full functioning informatics solution
and you start out with an empty cluster
and the trick the fun part is that we
can do this in about 20 minutes
so what we do with inquiry we deployed
many clusters many types of clusters but
there's some common denominator that we
see in our deployments we've taken these
best practices in terms of network
configuration OS configurations various
optimizations deploying the right
administration tools monitoring tools
but we don't stop there that if we stop
there that would be a fine cluster that
you can use from an IT basis but we go
beyond that our goal is to enable the
scientist in this case the bio
informatics scientist the inquiry
cluster is loaded with more than 200
open source applications which are all
clustering abled and we provide a
consistent user interface a web
interface to all these applications and
on top of that we deploy about 100
gigabytes of genomic data so as soon as
the cluster is up you're ready to fire
so the idea is to go from the many
computer concept to a single virtual
computing resource that is usable by a
scientist but we go beyond that like I
said before it's we don't want to
necessarily trained scientists to become
computer scientists we want to empower
them to go from to extract the command
line into something that is more
accessible so inquiry is a orchestration
of many open-source tools and utilities
just to mention a couple of the
components behind inquiry the first one
is pies pies is a very cool tool from
the pasture Institute and the heart of
pies is essentially a collection of XML
documents describing a bunch of
command-line bioinformatics tools you
know starting from this set of XML
documents we can render an interface
whether it be a
a web interface or a web services
interface so now that we presented the
application we connect the the execution
of that application to the cluster using
Sun grid engine or we can use platform
Alice F and that's all completely
abstracted away from the user in
integrated within inquiry we've also
deployed several monitoring and
administrative tools that are commonly
available in the open source domain for
example this is ganglia and it provides
a very nice snapshot of your cluster and
allows you to drill down to get more
detail of the health of various nodes
within your cluster in addition we
provide another perspective of your
cluster from the load management system
so how are jobs running on your system
what who's running jobs and what jobs
are pending in and everything from the
user jobs mission perspective because
we're using pies we have a great deal of
flexibility in terms of how the
application interfaces are presented to
the user for each application within
enquiry you provide two interfaces a
simple view which gives you just the
bare bones of what you need to in order
to execute that application in addition
we provide an expert view with all the
bells and whistles of the excellent that
application along with complete
documentation for each of those flags
for each for every application within
inquiry also with an inquiry we manage
results that are generated from the
various applications results calculated
at different times are accessible and
can be retrieved in either pipe into
other applications or just
we examined okay so one of the funny fun
things about inquiry like I said we can
deploy this within 15 or 20 minutes and
this is inquiry we deploy it on an iPod
okay and the idea behind that is first
we take the ipod we plugged it into the
head node and we we mount the ipod and
run an application called the cluster
configuration tool as shown here in this
tool provides a way of setting the
number of nodes in the cluster external
IP addresses just the external things
about that is needed to describe that
cluster I'm step two in configuring your
cluster is then you boot off of the ipod
from the head node and that takes about
five or six minutes and when that's done
images for the entire cluster are loaded
onto the head node you're essentially
done with the ice at that point in the
third step is to boot each individual
node of the cluster from the head node
and that can take anywhere from a few
minutes to up to ten minutes because
depending upon the network is there
pointed out that you've deployed within
the cluster but that can be done in
parallel so when you look at the
aggregate it takes about you know 15 20
minutes before you have a fully working
cluster and that's it
[Applause]
relations on your award I'd now like to
introduce Theodore gray director of user
interfaces for Wolfram to talk a little
bit about grid Mathematica and its
solution oh can we have the demo machine
okay mathematica is a presentation tool
so we use it instead of keynote and I
just typed in my presentation isn't that
typical okay so the first thing i should
say is that this is actually not my talk
ordinarily will be given by roger
governments and our director of rd but
he could be here so i'm giving the talk
which should be interesting at least I
didn't have to prepare it that's one
plus so good Mathematica is basically
the grid version of Mathematica
Mathematica itself is a desktop
application you can buy it it's a very
general-purpose programming language and
system for doing mathematics there's
product called network Mathematica which
is basically a network license server
and there's an application package
called the parallel computing toolkit
which is an application pack that lets
one Mathematica session manage multiple
ones on a network and then grid
Mathematica is essentially a marketing
concept of those two together and it's
cheaper per node than the regular copy
of Mathematica but you can actually put
together those different elements
separately so basically one of the goals
of grid Mathematica is is like has been
mentioned several times before here to
try to abstract as much as possible the
details of the configuration of your
cluster and sort of what brand of
computer it is and things like that so
the sort from the system point of view
you think of a cluster in terms of you
have some processors you start processes
on them you schedule them and you
exchange data
in the mathematics of you you you think
of having colonel processes Mathematica
Colonel so that's what we call the
computational engine and you have
expressions in the mathematical language
that you want to have evaluated and the
sort of grid clustering element is to
distribute those processes those
mathematic expressions to different
kernels running on on a cluster and it's
sort of who try to be buzzword compliant
and so we can handle let's say I guess I
guess we have the same sort of general
region where you have a head machine
which is the master and you have these
multiple ones which are not accessible
from the outside world and you have
mathematically handling that
communication strictly between
mathematical processes not involving any
other sort of resource management
software the system is written entirely
in top-level Mathematica code which
means it's completely machine
independent completely platform
independent and you're not restricted to
any of the sort of you know see data
types or anything like that you can use
arbitrary mathematical expressions which
which could be you know numbers arrays
of numbers strings but also you know
structured symbolic expressions that
represent either mathematical objects or
you know protein structure or whatever
you could sort of a general thing so
it's not just for sort of numerical or
data analysis type things you can do
well abstract mathematical sorts of
things to the communication between
processes is through math link which is
our sort of high-level communication
protocol it uses whichever of the
underlying protocols you'd like I think
in this case we have it configured to
use TCP between nodes but if you have
different we have devices for various
different kinds of
work so you can have either relatively
tightly clustered things or you could
have them on you know distant more
loosely clustered things our sort of
resource management mechanism which I'll
demonstrate in a little while it
supports both sort of automatics load
balancing as well as the letting do that
manually and you can do that which I
have to admit another expert in cluster
computing but it sounds great and it
also the sort of concurrency controlling
structures deal with a you know Colonel
the dies or doesn't come back or
whatever even deserve shuffle things
around which will also see in a minute
okay so let's actually do this we're
going to start Mathematica here yes so
this these evaluations are being are
running on the head machine it just told
us that the name of the head machines X
serves 0 will kind of use this machine
name as a way of telling where a
calculation is going and this is a NOS
10 version so this is kind of some
configuration which took most of
yesterday to get right but you know
that's because I didn't know how to do
it the little bit about plugging an ipod
and it's automatic that would be great
and so now what we're going to do is
actually launch all we're launching 10
kernels and that's because if there's
five machines with two processes each so
we're kind of putting one process on
each computer so that's finished now
we're going to do a little saying this
this command says take this expression
and evaluate it on each of the clients
so you see it's returned xserve 12345
twice and each of them is a mac OS
version so i should note at this point
that from here on out absolutely nothing
would be different about any of these
demos in any way shape or form if this
had returned a list of you know son and
pc or linux or you know anything else
there's absolutely nothing machine
dependent or hardware dependent or
platform dependent or anything which you
know it's sort of it's a nice advantage
because if you built some cluster and
then you find out that oh you built a
big Linux cluster but now you can get
max that are cheaper per you know per
CPU cycle you could just add some max to
it or vice versa so let me show you some
simple examples of how you actually use
the parallels when we saw this so this
is just running on the local machine and
this says run the same command on this
particular node number one and it's
machines that just means run it on all
of them so we can see and obviously you
could put something you know more
interesting you could do a Hydra
factorial on each one and get that back
for those of you who are familiar with
Mathematica this probably will make
somewhat more sense them to those who
aren't but this is just showing some
basic Mathematica command table build a
table of expressions like this and here
we're building this sort of the
demonstrated table of machine name
always on the same machine and now we're
going to do it on farming that out to
the processors now you notice that it's
used the same machine over and over
again and that's actually because I
discovered that just a few minutes ago
because this command is too fast so it's
done before the load management is
basically saying is done already we'll
just do it on the same machine but if we
slow this down a little but if we put in
let's say a thousand sec torial and
suppress the output still too fast all
right so now if you see it's now sort of
distributing a little bit more because
the processes are not actually finishing
instantly
okay so another function is map map
takes a function and applies it to each
of the arguments in a list do the same
thing here and again it's kind of boring
because it's just too fast but you get
the idea that that many of the sort of
programming constructs that you have in
Mathematica for building tables or for
applying functions to data can be
parallelized very easily and as long as
there isn't you know data dependency
between the instances of that function
it'll just work and there's a host of
other sorts of commands that are built
in dot products in our inner product
animation plotting things like that that
are automatically or whether it's
prepared sort of parallelized versions
this is an example of how you distribute
data and code so this is a mathematica
program it actually in Rogers version is
a talk it just added up the numbers 1 to
N but I thought that was silly so what I
had to do is add up the numbers 1
through n and then add the process ID
and then take the factorial of that just
so we would get a better number so we'll
also it proves that I have great
confidence this system because I have no
idea what the process IDs are going to
be so we execute this in the head
machine we made that definition on the
head machine and now we execute it and
we get a number that that is involved
with the processing the idea in some way
and now what we're going to do is export
this definition and that command took
the definition that we made in the head
machine and distributed it to all the
nodes which you can do because you know
it's not a seed program it's not
something you have to compile it's a
mathematical expression that can be
interpreted by the mathematica
interpreter and now we'll go and
evaluate this machine name trend I just
will let us see which one each one
executed on and we do that and so now we
have the the 10 results and you'll see
each number is a little bit different
because
it had a different process ID okay so
I'm doing for time let me skip these and
this one this is basically showing the
lower level operations where rather than
just do a map you can actually set up a
queue where you you I'm not going to go
through the details here but you
basically tell it the queue up these
processes and then you can you know sir
asked for it to wait for certain ones to
finish and you can wait for a list in
which everyone finishes first will
return sort of like a select call if you
familiar with UNIX and that allows you
that sort of a foundation in which you
can build your own manual more
sophisticated load balancing and process
managing things so now here's an example
and as I mentioned this is actually
Rogers pocket I don't actually know that
much about parallel computing but I
thought I would make a little example
and to whip something up for the demo to
see if I could do it and what this does
is it recreate the keynote demo fractal
that I used a couple days ago and this
is the code for that fractal and so here
this will run this example now on the
just on the head machine as a single
process and you see it goes through and
this is a little sort of graphical
animation progress monitor thing that I
wrote a while ago as you can see it's
kind of poking along you may notice it's
not much slower than the g5 demo that's
because I'm not computing as many points
and because it's also not doing the big
num calculation in the background it's
not in fact the case of this is as fast
as a g5 and they're to split the
animation together so now let's run it
on the grid and for those of you can see
the light look at the light here we get
very important always to watch the
lights on your
your pleasure and here we go now notice
the first frame you don't get any faster
because it takes you know they're all
doing at the same time but then once it
gets going you basically get 10 at a
time okay so if I'm reading my clock
right I really need to hurry so
basically the advantages are it's much
much cheaper than buying separate copies
of mathematica if you buy the node it
works at a completely open ended
heterogeneous environment absolutely no
restrictions at all as long as it runs
Mathematica we have sort of high-level
symbolic representation of the parallel
structures and the parallel control that
you need to do are the controls to get
good performance it's pretty easy to
take existing code and as long as it's
suitable for parallelization it's easy
to do that and you can do it you can do
this sort of in those in the rich world
of Mathematica rather than the sword
more limited you know worlds of C and
Java or whatever where you have to do a
lot more sort of by yourself and as a
prototyping environment for parallel
algorithms of course it's very nice and
I guess that's about it and we all have
to remember to close these other words
we leave things running thank you
[Applause]
okay well i would like to basically wrap
up by pointing to a quite a variety of
resources for more information so first
of all there's been a lot of tracks and
sessions that are relevant to this topic
and unfortunate a lot more earlier in
the week so hopefully you had a lot of
opportunity to get to see some of these
sessions this week on the enterprise IT
track if you don't encourage you to
watch the videos since there were some
excellent sessions there will be a
session tomorrow on deploying x server
eight in the afternoon and i'm sorry
deploying xserve tomorrow afternoon and
friday afternoon on deploying xserver
aid encourage you to attend those
sessions on the developer slide there's
some excellent sessions on development
tools for the UNIX layer and performance
tools and those were again either
earlier today or yesterday but again
encourage you to watch the videos if you
weren't able to attend those sessions
who to contact so again you uh for
information or follow-up you're welcome
to contact me again Doug Brooks my email
is up there Michael and Fyodor have
contacts as well and ask if eleventh
who's our server technology evangelist
wasn't able to attend the session but
from a developer perspective he's your
contacts from a server technology
perspective additional resources so we
gave you a list of solutions earlier I
wanted to point you to a key page that
we've recently put up about two or three
weeks ago which is the compute cluster
solutions page if you go to the
apple.com / server page you'll find
quite a number of solutions specific
pages one specifically on clustering
which highlighted all the key solutions
that were referenced today again the
same page can provide product
information and of course information on
both the bio team and
grid mathematica this is an area where
there's a wealth of a community support
from mailing lists and so I wanted to
make sure you're well aware of several
key mailing lists that apple and some
third parties host Apple hosts the
saitek and the eunuch supporting list
which are both very relevant to the
cluster space and bioinformatics org has
some excellent mailing lists for bio
clusters and bio darwin development
under under darwin
you